 

Welcome to Stanford Health Care.

Whether you are seeking primary care for a wellness check-up, or specialized care for a
complex condition, you can trust us for high-quality, innovative services. In fact, U.S.
News & World Report has honored us as one of the nation’s top hospitals.

Our doctors and nurses combine expertise and compassion to understand your unique
health needs and to personalize a precise care plan specifically for you.

All our care providers—whether at Stanford Hospital or more than 60 clinics throughout
the Bay Area and beyond—share the same commitment. We are dedicated to your
health, safety, comfort, and convenience.

A unique health system driven to innovate

As an academic
Stanford Health Care is no ordinary health system. As part of Stanford Medicine and the

larger Stanford University family, we provide care as an “academic medical center.” med ical cente r, we
Ine .

Being an academic medical center gives us the unique ability to combine clinical care, do n't J ust d eliver

research programs, and teaching to advance the understanding and practice of care, we de velop It.

medicine. And this means we can provide you latest innovations in care, proven in both
theory and practice.

Our teams of doctors and scientists harness the resources of one of the world’s leading
universities -with groundbreaking programs in medicine, bioengineering, genetics,
computer science, and other fields-to create breakthroughs in diagnosis and
treatment. So no matter the services you need, you will always benefit from the latest
medical thinking in primary care and specialty care, including cancer, neuroscience,
cardiology, and orthopaedics.

 

 

 

Our Silicon Valley location adds to our innovation

 
As an academic medical center in the heart of Silicon Valley, we are perfectly positioned
to attract leading medical experts, drawn to the vision and energy of the Valley’s
innovation corridor.

Amplifying this creative atmosphere, we enjoy partnerships with many local leaders in
technology. Together, we are working to translate scientific insights into real-world
solutions that can help us precisely manage your care.

MAKE AN APPOINTMENT

Request an appointment directly with your clinic, your doctor or provider,

 

or call 650-498-3333.

Specialized expertise, no matter your condition

Take comfort in knowing that your doctors at Stanford Health Care are experts in
diagnosing and treating your condition, no matter how complex or common it may be. Stanford Hospital
Physicians Give
Heart Patient a

Second Chance

Many are on advisory boards that define national standards of care. Many also lead
studies of new treatments, or help develop new procedures or medical devices

 

So, when new advances become available, we are ready to offer them to you

. . . . : mn Play Video | 4:42
immediately and, in many cases, already have extensive experience providing them.

One example is a treatment we helped pioneer: transcatheter aortic valve replacement
(TAVR). This minimally invasive procedure relieves heart valve problems with less pain,
less scarring, and faster recovery than other treatments. Today, we are one of just three
hospitals in all of Northern California that perform TAVR.

“Stanford is a collection of persistent, great minds that never give up and
never stop caring. They never forget that healthcare is personal.”

-Lovester L., Stanford Heart Transplant Recipient

A precise diagnosis starts you on the best care path

 

 

afte dal The right care starts with the right diagnosis. So, our teams use the most advanced
Biopsy Improves . . .

diagnostic techniques.
Prostate Cancer
Diagnosis and For example, we use targeted biopsy that combines magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
Treatment with ultrasound to help diagnose and treat prostate cancer. This gives us the power to

see and access 100% of the prostate, where other methods may show as little as 1%. As

Play Video | 3:55 .
aresult, we can treat the cancer completely before it can spread.

 

Being able to access and target cancers that other techniques miss is a tremendous
advantage. These are the types of advancements used daily at Stanford but not even
available at most other hospitals.

Advanced diagnostic technologies help us precisely detect and treat your condition.
Then, even after your visit to our hospital or clinics, we can continue to partner with you
for a lifetime of advanced care.
Access to tomorrow’s therapies through clinical trials
We participate in many research studies and clinical trials. So, we can offer you early
access to innovative diagnostics and treatments, some available only from us.

Our legacy of innovation began more than half a century ago. One of our earliest
successes was the world’s first medical linear accelerator for cancer treatment. Our
doctors worked with Stanford physicists to develop this technology to treat a patient
with an eye tumor. The treatment saved his vision. Now, about half of all people who
undergo radiation therapy, for many different types of cancers, receive treatment with a
linear accelerator.

This is just one of our many breakthroughs over the decades. Others include:
* America’s first successful adult human heart transplant

* The world's first successful combined heart/lung transplant

* The birthplace of Cyberknife to treat brain and spinal tumors

+ First successful use of monoclonal antibodies to treat cancer

+ Research that led to the first cochlear implants to treat hearing loss

Search our Clinical Trials

See our Legacy of Innovation

 

 

Personalized treatment and support for your precise needs
When we put together your care team, we assemble the experts
who are most qualified to provide precisely the type of care you
need.

Your team will prepare a holistic care plan tailored to your
medical, emotional, and social needs as well as those of your
family.

Our personalized approach can produce more precise diagnoses,
more effective treatments, and less stress on both you and your
family - all keys to achieving a better health outcome and quality
of life.

We partner closely with both you and your family

Your care is a partnership involving us all: you, your family, your
caregivers, and Stanford Health Care. So, beyond our clinical
expertise, we also provide social, financial, and lifestyle support
services. You can depend on us for language interpreting,
caregiver groups, access to the Stanford Health Library, and
much more.

When we put together your care team, we assemble the experts
who are most qualified to provide precisely the type of care you
need.

Your team will prepare a holistic care plan tailored to your
medical, emotional, and social needs as well as those of your
family.

Our personalized approach can produce more precise diagnoses,
more effective treatments, and less stress on both you and your
family - all keys to achieving a better health outcome and quality
of life.

We partner closely with both you and your family

Your care is a partnership involving us all: you, your family, your
caregivers, and Stanford Health Care. So, beyond our clinical
expertise, we also provide social, financial, and lifestyle support
services. You can depend on us for language interpreting,
caregiver groups, access to the Stanford Health Library, and
much more.

We design care settings with patients for patients

Our partnered approach extends to the very foundation of our
hospital and clinics. To improve the patient experience, we work
with our patient advisory board to plan and build care settings
centered around your needs and comfort. Recent examples
include Cancer Center South Bay and our Neuroscience Health
Center.

TUMOR BOARDS: AN INNOVATION IN PERSONALIZED CARE

To make sure you receive precisely the cancer care you need, we
developed the concept of tumor boards. These meetings, which are
now a standard of cancer care, bring together experts from medical
oncology, surgery, genetics and other fields to develop the best
treatment plan for you. So, instead of relying on just a single
opinion, we put multiple experts to work on your behalf.

We apply this collaborative approach to treatment planning across
other clinics and specialties, so you get the most personalized
treatment for your needs.

TUMOR BOARDS: AN INNOVATION IN PERSONALIZED CARE

To make sure you receive precisely the cancer care you
need, we developed the concept of tumor boards. These
meetings, which are now a standard of cancer care, bring
together experts from medical oncology, surgery, genetics
and other fields to develop the best treatment plan for you.
So, instead of relying on just a single opinion, we put
multiple experts to work on your behalf.

We apply this collaborative approach to treatment planning

across other clinics and specialties, so you get the most
personalized treatment for your needs.

 

The Neuroscience Health Center: Designed by Patients for Patients
“From my critical, urgent need years ago to a more routine surgery this year,
the genuine concern for the patient and family experience and quality of
care at Stanford is awesome."

-Susan R., Stanford Hospital patient

Care close to where you live and work 926 a
9 Q Pinole ° a 9
You can access the high-quality, innovative services of Stanford . | © Lo ® 9 pa =
Health Care throughout our network: our hospital plus our - “Op 1 Woakiana 5
more than 60 clinics and centers across the peninsula, East 9 oe
Bay, and South Bay. \ 2 9 © 8 o Qtracy
\ . wil
Whether you need primary, specialized, or complex care, count Pleasanton

on us. We are nearby and ready to help you.
Find a Doctor

Find a Clinic

 

\ @
@ 1 santa¥ _ poy ;
Cruz @:

Easy access to your care team

Seeing a Stanford doctor is easy. We accept coverage from most major insurers and you
can usually make your own appointment without a doctor referral. Additional
conveniences include: Do you have questions about your
condition? Our medical librarians
offer free literature searches.

STANFORD HEALTH LIBRARY

+ Medical interpreter services with expertise in more than 20 languages

+ MyHealth, our patient information tool you can use to make appointments,

communciate with your care team, and more Learn more
+ For select conditions: video visits right from your home, workplace, or while traveling

+ Dedicated Guest Services to help you 24/7. Call us at 650-498-3333.

“When others gave up and left me to deal with my pain on my own,
Stanford provided me with tools to not only lessen my pain but live a full life

with my chronic pain.”
-Nancy C., Pain Clinic

Exceptional quality and safety standards
You know quality when you see it. A nurse's response time, a doctor's bedside manner,

the hospital's atmosphere — all affect how you feel about the quality of your care. Learn more about our quality
. . ae . . initiatives and data

Our goal is to provide you with high-quality care that is:

+ Safe: helping you while protecting you from further illness or injury

+ Effective: using the latest scientific knowledge and best practices

+ Patient-centered: respecting your preferences and values and ensuring that they
guide all decisions

+ Timely: reducing waits and harmful delays
+ Efficient: preventing wasted money, equipment, supplies, ideas, and energy

+» Equitable: achieving consistently high quality regardless of your gender, ethnicity,
location, and socioeconomic status

Measuring quality helps us ensure quality

Since delivering quality care to you is our #1 commitment, we put programs in place to
continually measure and improve our quality. We also offer you clear, accurate, honest
information about our measures. By being completely transparent, we can help you
make fully informed decisions about your care.

Quality data show you how well our care meets national standards and achieves the
desired outcome for each procedure. The data also help us identify opportunities
where we can make care even better for you.

 

Explore more of Stanford Health care ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
Whether you’re looking for a specialist, a primary care doctor, or information about a Find a Doctor or Provider
specific condition or treatment, you can find the information you’re looking for right

Find Conditions & Treatments
here.

Find a Stanford Clinic

FIND A DOCTOR OR PROVIDER

FIND CONDITIONS & TREATMENTS

aD eg od

FOR PATIENTS & VISITORS

Billing

alone ea Ole mst UC

Protections Against Surprise Medical Bills

 
aateoMNe-Taesex-1C1NA
Insurance

Hospital Check-in
Contact Us

Video Visits

Send a Greeting Card
Get a Second Opinion
COVID-19 Resource Center
Behavioral Standards
Patient Privacy Policy
MAKE A GIFT

ABOUT US

Quality & Safety

Annual Report

300 Pasteur Drive Renewal Program

Sustainability

STANFORD HEALTH CARE - NOW
FOR HEALTHCARE PROFESSIONALS
ledge NSLS

Nesey

Allied Healthcare Professionals

First Responders

NEWSROOM

feats

VOLUNTEERING

VENDORS

STANFORD MEDICINE PARTNERS

STANFORD HEALTH CARE TRI-VALLEY

Stanford Medicine
Stanford Medicine Children's Health

Stanford University

0xXB

 
ql Website Privacy Policy | Code of Conduct | Notice of Nondiscrimination
emer Tey

Mr Teal CRA eh

 
