WIKIPEDIA,

“The Fre Eneycopeda

Medicine





Medicine isthe science!" and practi! of caring for patients, managing the dagnoss, prognosis,
prevention, estment,paliaon of tel injury of dsease, nd promoting ter hea. Medicine encompasses a
varity of health care practices evolved to malntain and restore heath bythe
reventon and treatment of lnss. Contemporary medicine applies biomedical clences, biomedical esearch
genetics, and medical technology to dlagnose, ea, and prevent injury and disease, ypcally trough
pharmaceuticals or surgery, bu also through therapies as verse as psychotherapy,

extemal splints and traction, medical devices, biologics, and ionizing radiation, amongst others 3)









“Medicine has been practiced since prehistoric times, and for most of tis tme it was an art (an area
of creativity and skill), frequently having connections tothe religious and philosophical beliefs of
local culture. For example, a medicine man would apply herbs and say prayers for healing, or an
ancient philosopher and physician would apply bloodlewing according to the theories of humorism. In
recent centuries, since the advent of modern science, most medicine has become a combination of art
and science (both basic and applied under the umbrella of medical science). For example,
‘wile stitching technique for sutures is an art learned through practice, knowledge of what happens
at the cellular and molecular level inthe issues being stitched arises through science.



Prescientific forms of medicine, now known as traditional medicine or folk medicine, remain commonly
used in the absence of scientific medicine and are thus called alternative medicine. Altemative
treatments outside of sclemific medicine with ethical, safety and efficacy concers are termed
quackers

Etymology

Medicine (Ux; /lmtdsin/ 0%, us; /mfdishn/ 49 i the science and practice of the diagnosis, p
old word for what is now called a medicine, and also the field of medicine.®1





oss, eaten, and prevention of disease IS1The word “medicine” I derived frm Latin medicus, meaning *a
physician” 171 The word “physic” self trom which physician” drives, was dhe



Clinical practice





Medical avalailty and clinical practice vary across the world de to regional differences in culure
and technology. Moder scenic medicine is highly developed inthe Westem word, while in developing
counties such as pars of Aca or
Asia the population may rely more heavily on tradional medicine wit limited evidence and efficacy
and no required oral traning fr practitioners)





ed medicine snot universally used in cal practice; for example, 22007 survey of Utraure eviews found
that about 49% ofthe Interventions lacked scent evidence to support ether benefit or ham!



Inthe developed world, evidenes

In modern clinical practice, physicians and physician assstans personally assess patents to
dlagnose,prognose, treat, and prevent disease using clinical judgment. The doctor-patient
relationship typically begins with an interaction with an
examination ofthe patients medical history and medical record, followed by a medical interview" and
a physical examination, Basie diagnoste medical devices (eg, stethoscope, tongue depressor) are
typically used. After examining for signs
and interviewing for symptoms, the doctor may order medical tsts (., blood tess), take a biopsy, of
prescribe pharmaceutical drugs or other therapies, Differential diagnosis methods help to rule out
conditions based on the information provided.
During the encounter, properly informing the patient of all relevant facts i an important part ofthe
relationship and the development of tut. The medical encounter is then documented in the medical
record, which i a legal dacument in many
jurisdictions (2! Followups may be shorter but follow the same general procedure, and specialists
follow a simllar process. The diagnosis and weatment may take only a few minutes oF afew weeks,
depending on the complexity ofthe issue







The Doctor by Sir Luke Fides (1891)

“The compooeos ofthe medica Interview! and encounter re:



+ Chief complaint (CC): the reason for the current medical visit. These are the symptoms. They are
in the patient's own words and are recorded along with the duration of each one. Also called chief
concern or presenting
aman

+ Current activity: occupation, hobbies, what the patient actually does.

+ Family history (FH): listing of diseases in the family that may impact the patient. A family tree
is sometimes used.

+ History of present illness (HP) the chronological order of events of symptoms and futher
clarification of each symptom. Distinguishable from history of previous illness, often called past
medical history (PMH). Medical history
comprises HPI and PMH

+ Medications (Rx): what drugs the patient takes including prescribed, over-the-counter, and home
remedies, as well as altemative and herbal medicines or remedies. Allergies are also recorded.

+ Past medical history (PMH/PMHx): concurrent medical problems, past hospitalizations and operation,
injuries, past infectious diseases or vaccinations, history of known allergies.

+ Review of systems (ROS) or systems inquiry: a set of additonal questions to ask, which may be
missed on HPI: a general enquiry (have you noticed any weight loss, change in sleep quality, fevers,
lumps and bumps? etc.),
followed by questions on the body's main organ systems (hear, lungs, digestive trac, urinary trac,
etc.)

+ Social history (SH): birthplace, residences, marital history, social and economic status, habits
(including diet, medications, tobacco, alcoho).



“The physical examination isthe examination ofthe patient for medical signs of dsease that are
objective and observable in contrast to symptoms that are volunteered bythe patent and are not
necessarily objectively observable‘) The healthcare
provider uses sigh, hearing touch, and sometimes smell (eg. n infection, uremia, diabetic
ketoacidosis). Four actions are the basis of physical examination: inspection, palpation (el),
percussion (ap to detemine resonance characteristics), and
auscultation (listen), generally In that order, although auscultation occurs prior to percussion and
palpation for abdominal assessments. {4





“The clinical examination involves the study of 51



+ Abdomen and rectum
+ Cardiovascular (heart and blood vessels)

+ General appearance ofthe patient and specific indicators of disease (nutional status, presence of
jaundice, pallor or clubbing

+ Genitalia (and pregnancy if the patient is or could be pregnant)

+ Head, eye, ear, nose, and throat (HEENT))

+ Musculoskeletal (including spine and extremities)

+ Neurological (consciousness, awareness, brain, vision, cranial nerves, spinal cord and peripheral
nerves)

+ Psychiatrie (orientation, mental state, mood, evidence of abnormal perception or though).

+ Respiratory (large airways and lungs)#51

+ Skin

+ Vital signs including height, weight, body temperature, blood pressure, pulse, respiration rate,
and hemoglobin oxygen saturaton!1

Elizabeth Blackwell the frst female
physician inte Unted States graduated
from SUNY Upstate (1847)

14s to likely focus on areas of interest highlighted in the medical history and may not include
everything listed above.



“The treatment plan may Incude ordering adonal medal laboraory tests and medial imaging sues,
stating therapy, fel toa special, or watchful observation  fllow-up may be advise. Depending upon
the heath insurance plan athe managed car system, various forms of
lization review” such as prir authorization of tes, ay place bars on acesing expensive services



‘The medical decision-making (MDM) process includes the analysis and synthesis ofall che above data
to come up with a list of possible diagnoses (the differential diagnoses), along with an idea of
what needs to be done to obtain a definitive diagnosis that would explain the patient’ problem,

(On subsequent visits, the pracess may be repeated in an abbreviated manner to obtain any new
history, symptoms, physical findings, labor imaging results, or specialist consultations

Institutions





Contemporary medicine is, In general, conducted within health care systems, Legal, credentialing,
and financing frameworks are established by individual governments, augmented on occasion by
international organizations, such as churches. The
characteristics of any given health care system have a significant impact on the way medical care is
provided,



From ancient times, Christan emphasis on practical charity gave rise tothe development of systematic
nursing and hospitals, and the Catholic Church today remains the largest non-government provider of
medical services in the world.71 Advanced
industrial countries (withthe exception of the United States)!"#129) and many developing counties
provide medical services through a system of universal health care that alms to guarantee care
forall through a single-payer health care system or
compulsory private or cooperative health insurance. This Is intended to ensute that the entice
population has access to medical care onthe basis of need rather than ability to pay. Delivery may
be via private medial practices, state-owned hospitals and
clinics, or charities, most commonly a combination of all tree.



“Most tribal societies provide no guarantee of healthcare for the population as a whole. In such
societies, healthcare is available to those who can afford to pay for it, have self-insured it
(ether directly or as part of an employment contract), oF may be
covered by care financed directly by the government or tibe.



The Hospital of Santa Mara,
fresco by Domenico di Bartlo, 1441—
102

‘Transparency of Information is another fcr defining a delivery sytem, Access to information an
condilons, treatments, qual, and pelcing gray afets the choice of paentconsumers and, therfore, te
Lncenves of medical pofessonas
Wile the US healthcare system has come under ire for slack of openness] new legen may encourage
eater openness, There Is a percelved tension between the ned for ansparency onthe one hand and sch
sess patent confidenalty
and the posible expotaton of Information for commercial galn onthe othe:





‘The health professionals who provide care in medicine comprise multiple professions, such as
medics, nurses, physiotherapists, and psychologists. These professions will have thelr own ethical
standards, professional education, and bodies. The medical
eu) — ee

profession has been conceptualized from a sociological perspective 2")



Delivery

pay

Provision of medical care is classified into primary, secondary, and tertiary care categories!22)



Primary cre medical services are provided by physicians, physician asians, nue practlones or other
health profesionals wha have fist contact witha patent seeking medical treatment or care!) These
acer in physician afcs, medical practices,
cline, ursing homes, schools, patents omes, and in ther places hat ae rypicaly geographically close
to where pate lve, work rsd. Abou 90% of medial vis can be saisacoly and effectively deal with by
primary cre provider) rimary
Care vss might cde team of minor, acte or conc nests, preventive car, and healh education. Pimary
cael lected othe ealth of entre populations ands providers cae fr paints of all ges and sexes



Secondary care medical services are provided by medical specialists in their offices, practice or
clinics, or at local community hospitals, to patients referred by the primary cre provider who frst
dlagnosed or eated the patient Referrals’ are made of those
patients who required the patcular expertise of, or specific procedures performed by, specialists.
Secondary care services include bath ambulatory care and inatent services, emergency departments,
some intensive care medicine, some surgeries and related
services, physical therapy, labor and delivery, endoscopy units, diagnostic laboratory and medical
imaging services, hospce center, and others depending on the health services systems within which
the care is being delivered, Some primary cae providers may
also take care of hospitalized patiens and deliver Babies in a secondary cae seting



Modern drug ampoules



‘Tertiary care medical services are provided by specialist teams of providers in lager, more
specialised hospitals or regional medical centers, which are equipped with diagnostic and treatment
facilities not typically avallable at local (often smaller) hospitals. This
allows for the treatment and care of patients with more complex or urgent or serious medical
conditions, which in tum may require more expertise (Including mult-disciplinary teams) and
resources (facilites, staff, bed days) to effectively treat, Tertiary care
‘may include that provided at buen treatment oF wauma centers, advanced neonatology unit services,
organ transplants high-risk pregnancy and child delivery, radiation oncology, and very many other
forms of spectalist and intensive care







“Modern medical care also depends on the keeping and use of information, including about a
particular patient—stil kept in many health care settings on paper ‘medical records, but
increasingly nowadays by electronic means.

In low-income countries, modem healthcare Is often too expensive for the average person.
Intemational healthcare policy researchers have advocated that "user fee

obligations, iglicant costs and bares remain fr the poor and be sick in accessing sufficient care
25)



bbe removed in these areas to ensure access; however, even with removal of patent fee

Sepantion of prestibng and depensng Is a prcie In medicine and pharmacy in which te phyiclan who
provides a medal presripon Is ferent from the pharmacist who provides the pesriglon dig to the
patient. In he Western word thre are
Centuries of tadlin and pracice dferenaing pharmacist from pyscans, and wa qule separate professions
developed. In many Aslan counts, onthe other hand, ts wadional for pyslclans to also deliver drugs
dell to paints at least n some
cases 25) Ths model also being used increasingly In the wes: especially for sinply-reated condo eg
those needing general anil) in emte locaton, with vulnerable communis of pales, and n small or
Integrated medical facies



Branches 4

‘Nurses in Kokopo, East New
Briain, Papua New



‘Working together as an interdisciplinary team, many highly tained health professionals besides
medical practitioners are involved in the delivery of modern health care. Examples include: nurses,
emergency medical technicians and paramedics, laboratory
Scientists, pharmacists, podiatrists, physiotherapists, respiratory therapists, speech therapists,
occupational therapists, radiographers, dietitians, and bloengineers, medical physicist, surgeons,
surgeon's assistant, surgical technologist.





‘The scope and sciences underpinning human medicine overlap many other fields, A patient admitted to
the hospital is usually under the care of a specific eam based on thelr main presenting problem, eg.
the cardiology team, who then may
With other specialties, eg, surgical, radiology to help diagnose of teat the main problem oF any
subsequent complications/developments



Physicians have many specializations and subspecializations into certain branches of medicine, which
are listed below. There are variations from county to countty regarding which specialties certain
subspectaties are in
‘The main branches of medicine are:

+ Basic sciences of medicine; this is what every physician is educated in, and some return to in
biomedical research.
+ Interdisciplinary fields, where different medical specialties are mixed to function in certain
occasions.
+ Medical specialties

Drawing by Marguerte Martyn (1918) of
2 visting nurse in St Lous, Missour,

with medicine and babies

Basic sciences

+ Anatomy is the study of the physical structure of organisms. In contrast to macroscopic or gross
anatomy, cytology and histology are concerned with microscopic structures.
+ Biochemistry is the study of the chemistry taking place in ving organisms, especially the
structure and function of their chemical components.

+ Biomechanics is the study ofthe structure and function of biological systems by means of the
methods of Mechanics.

+ Biophysics is an interdisciplinary science that uses the methods of physics and physical chemistry
to study biological systems.

* Biostatistics is the application of statistics to biological fields in the broadest sense. A
knowledge of biostatistics is essential inthe planning, evaluation, and interpretation of medical
research. Itis also fundamental to epidemiology and evidence-based medicine.
Cytology is the microscopic study of individual cells.



+ Embryology isthe study of the early development of organisms.

+ Endocrinology is the study of hormones and their effect throughout the body of animals

+ Epidemiology is the study of the demographics of disease processes, and includes, butis not
limited to, the study of epidemics.

+ Genetics is the study of genes, and thei role in biological inheritance

+ Gynecology isthe study of female reproductive system,

+ Histology is the study of the structures of biological tissues by light microscopy, electron
microscopy and immunohistochemistry

+ Immunology isthe study ofthe immune system, which includes the innate and adaptive immune system
in humans, for example.

+ Lifestyle medicine isthe study ofthe chronic conditions, and how to prevent, treat and reverse
them.

+ Medical physics is the study of the applications of physics principles in medicine

+ Microbiology is the study of microorganisms, including protozoa, bacteria, fungi, and viruses.

' Molecular biology isthe study of molecular underpinnings ofthe process of replication,
transcription and translation ofthe genetic material

+ Neuroscience includes those disciplines of science that are related to the study of the nervous
system. A main focus of neuroscience is the biology and physiology ofthe human brain and spinal
cord. Some related clinical
Specials include neurology neurosurgery and psychaty * Beoay andpnysteay “pare

+ Nutrition science (theoretical focus) and dietetics (practical focus) isthe study ofthe
relationship of food and dlink to health and disease, especially in determining an optimal diet.
Medical nutrition therapy is done by dietitians
and is prescribed for diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, weight and eating disorders, allergies,
malnutrition, and neoplastic diseases.

+ Pathology as a science is the study of disease — the causes, course, progression and resolution
thereof

+ Pharmacology is the study of drugs and their actions.

+ Photobiology is the study of the interactions between non-ionizing radiation and living organisms.

+ Physiology isthe study of the normal functioning ofthe body and the underiying regulatory
mechanisms.

+ Radiobiology is the study of the interactions between ionizing radiation and living organisms.

+ Toxicology isthe study of hazardous effects of drugs and poisons.







Specialties
In the broadest meaning of "medicine", there ate many different specialties. n the UK, most
specialities have thelr own body or college, which has its own entrance examination. These are
collectively known as the Royal Colleges, although not all
curently use the erm "Royal". The development of a speciality is often driven by new technology
(such asthe development of effective anaesthetics) or ways of working (such as emergency
departments); the new specialty leads tothe formation of a
unifying body of doctors and the prestige of administering their own examination.



Within medical circles, specialities usually it into one of two broad categories: "Medicine" and
"Surgery". "Medicine" refers tothe practice of non-operative medicine, and most of ls subspecialties
require preliminary training in Internal Medicine. Ia
the UK, this was tadltionally evidenced by passing the examination for the Membership of the Royal
College of Physicians (MRCP) or the equivalent college in Scotland or Ireland. "Surgery" refers to
the practice of operative medicine, and most
subspecialies inthis area require preliminary taining in General Surgery, which in the UK leads to
membership of dhe Royal College of Surgeons of England (MRCS). At present, some specialties of
medicine do not ft easily into ether of these
categories, such as radiology, pathology, or anesthesia. Most ofthese have branched from one or
other of the two camps abave; for example anaesthesia developed fist asa faculty of the Royal
College of Surgeons (for which MRCS/FRCS would have
been required) before becoming the Royal College of Anaesthetsts and membership of the college is
attained by sitting forthe examination of the Fellowship of the Royal College of Anesthetists
(FRCA).



Surgical specialty
‘Surgery is an ancient medical specialty that uses operative manual and instrumental techniques on a
patient to investigate of teat a pathological condition such as disease or injury, to help improve
bodily function or appearance or to repair unwanted
ruptured areas (for example, a perforated ear drum). Surgeons must also manage pre-operative, post-
operative, and potential surgical candidates on the hospital wards. n some centers, anesthesiology
is part of the division of surgery (for historical and
logistical reasons), although it isnot a surgical discipline. Other medical specialties may employ
surgical procedures, such as ophthalmology and dermatology, but are not considered surgical sub-
specialties per se.



‘Surgical uaining in the U.S. requires a minimum of five years of residency after medical school.
Sub-speclalties of surgery often require seven or more years. In addition, fellowships can last an
additional ane to three years. Because post-residency
fellowships can be competitive, many wainees devote two additional years to research. Thus in some
cases surgical training will not finish until more than a decade after medical school, Furthermore,
surgical raining can be very difficult and time
consuming,





Surgical subspecies ince those a physician may spectlize in after undergolng general surgery
residency traning as wells several surglel lds with separate reskency waning, Surgcl subspecies that
one may pursue following general
surgery residency taining:

+ Bariatric surgery
+ Cardiovascular surgery ~ may also be pursued through a separate cardiovascular surgery residency
track
+ Colorectal surgery

+ Endocrine surgery

+ General surgery

+ Hand surgery

+ Hepatico-Pancreatico-Biliary Surgery

+ Minimally invasive surgery

+ Pediatric surgery

+ Plastic surgery ~ may also be pursued through a separate plastic surgery residency track

+ Surgical critical care

+ Surgical oncology

+ Transplant surgery

+ Trauma surgery

+ Vascular surgery ~ may also be pursued through a separate vascular surgery residency track



‘Surgeons in an operating room

Other surgical specialties within medicine with thelr own individual residency teal



+ Dermatology
+ Neurosurgery

+ Ophthalmology

+ Oral and maxillofacial surgery

+ Orthopedic surgery

+ Otorhinolaryngology

+ Podiatric surgery ~ do not undergo medical school training, but rather separate training in
podiatry school
+ Urology

Internal medicine specialty
Internal medicine i the medical specaty dealing withthe prevention, dlagnosis, and treatment of
adult diseases!!! According to some sources, an emphasis on internal structures is implied! n North
America, specialists in intemal medicine ae commonly called “ntemists. Elsewhere,
especially in Commonvealh natlons, such specialists are often called physicians) These tems, ners or
physician (in the narrow sense, common outside North America, generally exclude practionrs of
gynecology and obstetrics, pathology, psychiatry, and especially surgery and its

subspecialitis.



Because their patient are often seriously il or require complex investigations, iments do much of
thir work in hospitals. Formerly, many internists were not subspecialized; such general physicians
would see any complex nonsurgical problem; this style of practice has become much less
common, tn modem urban practice, most interit are subspecialiss thats, they generally limit their
medial practice to problems of one organ system or to one pricular area of medical knowledge. For
example, gastoenterlogists and nephrologists specialize respectively in diseases ofthe
gut and the kidneys 22





In the Commonwealth of Nations and some other counties, specialist pediatricians and geriatriclans
are also described as specialist physicians (or internists) who have subspecialized by age of
patient rather than by organ system. Elsewhere, especially in North America, general pediattcs is
often a form of primary care

‘There are many subspecialities (or subdliseplines) of internal medicine:

+ Critical care medicine = Hematology = Neurology + Pulmonology/Pneumology/Respirology/ches
+ AngiologyVascular Medicine + Endocrinology = Hepatology = Oncology medicine

+ Bariatrics + Gastroenterology * Infectious disease = Pediatrics + Rheumatology

+ Cardiology * Geriatrics = Nephrology + Sports Medicine

‘Training in intemal medicine (as opposed to surgical waining), varies considerably across the
world: se the articles on medical education for more details. In North America, I requires atleast
three years of residency training after medical school, which can then be followed by a one- to
three-
year fellowship inthe subspecialties listed above. In general, resident work hours in medicine are
less than those in surgery, averaging about 6D hours per week in the US. This difference does not
apply in the UK where all doctors are now requited by law to work less than 48 hours per week on
average.



* Clinical laboratory sciences are the clinical diagnostic services that apply laboratory techniques
to diagnosis and management of patients. In the United States, these services are supervised by a
pathologist. The personnel that work in these medical laboratory
{departments are technically trained staff who do not hold medical degrees, but who usually hold an
undergraduate medical technology degree, who actually perform the tests, assays, and procedures
needed for providing the specific services. Subspecialties include
transfusion medicine, cellular pathology, clinical chemistry, hematology, clinical microbiology and
clinical immunolog

+ Clinical neurophysiology is concerned with testing the physiology or function of the central and
peripheral aspects of the nervous system. These kinds of tests can be divided into recordings of:
(2) spontaneous or continuously running electrical activity, or (2)
stimulus evoked responses. Subspecialties include electroencephalography, electromyography, evoked
potential, nerve conduction study and polysomnography. Sometimes these tests are performed by techs
without a medical degree, but the interpretation of these
tests is done by a medical professional

* Diagnostic radiology is concerned with imaging of the body, e.g. by x-rays, x-ray computed
tomography, ultrasonography, and nuclear magnetic resonance tomography
diagnostic sampling

+ Nuclear medicine is concerned with studying human organ systems by administering radiolabelled
substances (radiopharmaceuticals) to the body, which can then be imaged outside the body by a gamma
camera or a PET scanner. Each radiopharmaceutical
‘consists of two parts: a tracer that is specific for the function under study (e.g.,
neurotransmitter pathway, metabolic pathway, blood flow, or other), and a radionuclide (usually
either a gamma-emitter or a positron emitter). There is a degree of overlap between
nuclear medicine and radiology, as evidenced by the emergence of combined devices such as the PET/CT
scanner.

+ Pathology as a medical specialty is the branch of medicine that deals with the study of diseases
and the morphologic, physiologic changes produced by them. As a diagnostic specialty, pathology can
be considered the basis of modern scientific medical knowledge
End playa largercle ident based mariana, Many mosem moleelar lets such as Now cytomety, polnetase
chan easion (PCR), mnmunchstacherishy.eyogenstcn, gens teanangeents studies and huotescet i hu
hybedeaton (EI) fal man
the terntary of pathology.





Interventional radiologists can access areas in the body under imaging for an intervention or





Other major specialties

‘The following are some major medical specialties that do not ditecty fit into any ofthe above-
mentioned groups:

+ Anesthesiology (also known as anaesthetics): concemed with the perioperative management ofthe
surgical patient. The anesthesiologist’s role during surgery is to prevent derangement inthe vital
organs’ (ie. brain, heatt, kidneys) functions and postoperative pain

arse ofthe Sporting room, the enesinstlogy physician else serves he same ureon nthe bor and Gavery
ward, and some ae spcilzd ha ctledl mediane

+ Emergency medicine is concerned with the diagnosis and treatment of acute or life-threatening
conditions, including trauma, surgical, medical, pediatric, and psychiatric emergencies.

+ Family medicine, family practice, general practice or primary care is, in many counties, the first
port-of-call for patients with non-emergency medical problems. Family physicians often provide
services across a broad range of settings including office based
practices, emergency department coverage, inpatient care, and nursing home care,

+ Medical genetics is concerned with the diagnosis and management of hereditary disorders.

+ Neurology is concerned with diseases of the nervous system. In the UK, neurology is a subspecialty
of general medicine.

+ Obstetrics and gynecology (otten abbreviated as OB/GYN (American English) or Obs & Gynae (British
English)) are concerned respectively with childbirth and the female reproductive and associated
organs. Reproductive
‘medicine and fertility medicine are generally practiced by gynecological specialists.

+ Pediatrics (AE) or paediatrics (BE) is devoted to the care of infants, children, and adolescents.
Like internal medicine, there are many pediatric subspeciaties for specific age ranges, organ
systems, disease classes, and sites
of care delivery.

+ Pharmaceutical medicine is the medical scientific discipline concemed with the discovery,
development, evaluation, registration, monitoring and medical aspects of marketing of medicines for
the benefit of patients and public
health

' Physical medicine and rehabilitation (or physiatry) is concerned with functional improvement after
injury illness, or congenital disorders.

' Podiatric medicine is the study of, diagnosis, and medical and surgical treatment of disorders of
the foot, ankle, lower limb, hip and lower back

+ Preventive medicine is the branch of medicine concerned with preventing disease.

+ Community health or public health is an aspect of health services concerned with threats to the
overall health of a community based on population health analysis.
+ Psychiatry is the branch of medicine concerned with the bio-psycho-social study of the etiology,
diagnosis, treatment and prevention of cognitive, perceptual, emotional and behavioral disorders.
Related fields include psychotherapy and clinical psychology.





3 Michel Akotionga of
Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso





Interdisciplinary fields
Some interdisciplinary sub-specialties of medicine include:

+ Addiction medicine deals with the treatment of adaition

+ Aerospace medicine deals wih medical problems related tying and space travel

* Biomedical Engineering is afield dealing wih the application of engineering principles to medical
practice
Cinical pharmacology is concemed with how systems of therapeutics interact with paints.

* Conservation medicine studies the relaionship between human and non-human arimal health and
environmental conditons. Also known as ecological medicine, envitonmental medicine, or medical
geology.

+ Disaster medicine desis wth medical aspects of emergency preparedness, disaster miigaton and
management

+ Diving meccine (or hyperbaric mecicne) isthe prevention and teatment of diving lated problems,

* Evolutionary medicine isa perspective on medicine derived trough applying evolutionary theory.

+ Forensie medicine deals with medical questons in legal context, such as determination ofthe ime
and cause of death, type of weapon used ont rama, reconstruction of the facial features using
remains of deceased (skul thus ating identfcation,

* Gender-based mecicine studies the biological and physiological diferences between the human sexes
and how tha affects diferences in disease

* Health informatis isa relatively recent field that deal wth the application of computers and
information technology to medicine.

* Hospice and Paliatve Medicine isa relatively modern branch of clinical medicine that deals with
pain and sympiom relief and emotional suppor in patients with terminal nesses including cancer and
heart fale.

* Hospital medicine isthe general medical care of hospitalized patients. Physicians whose primary
professional focus is hospital medicine re called hospitalists in the United States and Canada. The
term Most Responsible Physician (MRP) or altendng physician is
also used interchangeably to describe this role.

«Laser medicine involves the use of lasers inthe diagnostics or treatment of various conditions.

+ Many other health science fields, eg. detetes

* Mecical ethics deals wit ethical and moral prinples that apply values and judgments tothe practice
of medicine

+ Medical humanities includes the humanities (iterate, philosophy, ethics, history and religion),
social scence (anthropology, cuitral studies, psychology, sociology, and the ars (iteratur, these,
fim, and visual ats) and ther application to medical education and
practice

+ Nosokinet isthe sciencelsubject of measuring and modeling the process of care in health and socal
care systems.

+ Nosology isthe classification of diseases fr various purposes

+ Occupational medicine is the provision of heath advice to organizations and individuals to ensure
thatthe highest standards of health and safety at work can be achieved and maintained,

* Pain management (also called pain medicine, or algiaty) isthe medical discpine concerned with the
reli of pan,

* Pharmacogenomics isa form of individualized medicine

+ Podiatric medicine is the study of, ciagnosis, and meal retment of csorders of the fot, ankle,
lower limb, hip and ower back

+ Sexual meccine is concerned with diagnosing, assessing and treating al isrders related to
sexuality

+ Sports medicine deals with the reatment and prevention and rehabilitation of sporslexercise
injuries such as muscle spasms, muscle teas, njrestoigaments (igament ears or ruptures) and their
reparin athletes, amateur and professional

+ Therapeutics isthe fed, more commonly referenced in earlier periods of history, ofthe various
remedies that can be used to teat disease and promt heath 2

*Ttavel medicine or emporiatrics deals with health problems ofinteational ravelers of travelers
across highly diferent environments.

+ Tropical medicine deals wit the prevention and treatment of tropical diseases. Its stucied
seperately n temperate clmates where those diseases are quite unfamilar to medical practttoners and
tel local cinicl needs.

+ Ugnt cae fess on delvery of uncheded, wai cae cus of te hes emergency depatmet or nus and neses th
ate not severe enough 0 eq cae an emergency department. In some aston hs neon combined wh he
emergency department

«Veterinary medicine; veterinarians apply similar techniques as physicians tothe care of non-human
animals.

+ Wademess medicine entails the practice of medicine in the wid, where conventional medical faites
may not be avaiable









Education and legal controls





“Medical education and taining varies around the world. I typically involves entry level education
at a university medical school, fallowed by a period of supervised practice oF internship, or
residency. This can be followed by postgraduate vocational
teaining. A variety of teaching methods have been employed in medical education, still tself a focus
of active research, In Canada and the United States of America, a Doctor of Medicine degree, often
abbreviated M.D., of a Doctor of Osteopathic
“Medicine degree, often abbreviated as D.O. and unique tothe United States, must be completed in and
delivered from a recognized university.

Since knowledge, techniques, and medical technology continue to evolve ata rapid rate, many
regulatory authorities require continuing medical education. Medical practitioners upgrade their
knowledge in various ways, including medical jourals,
seminars, conferences, and online programs. A database of objectives covering medical knowledge, as
suggested by national societies across the United States, can be searched at
hup:/idata.medobjectives.marian.edu/ Archived (htps:/web archive.ong

‘web/20181004185930/hup://data.medobjectives.marian.edu/) 4 October 2018 at the Wayback Machine)

Medical ethics

In most counties, itis a legal requirement for a medical doctor to be licensed or registered, In
general, this entails a medical degree from a university and accreditation by a medical board or an
equivalent national
organization, which may ask the applicant to pass exams. This restricts the considerable legal
authority ofthe medical profession to physicians that are tained and qualified by national
standards. It is also intended as
an assurance to patients and as a safeguard against charlatans that practice inadequate medicine for
personal gain. While the laws generally requite medical doctors to be tained

Hippocratic Medicine, they are not intended to discourage different paradigms of health

Doctors who are negligent or intentionally harmful in thele care of patients can face charges of
medical malpractice and be subject to civil, criminal, or professional sanctions.



"evidence based”, Western, oF

In the European Union, the profession of doctor of medicine is regulated. A profession Is sald to be
regulated when access and exercise Is subject tothe possession of a specific professional
qualification. The regulated professions database contains a list of
regulated professions for doctor of medicine in the EU member states, EEA counties and Switzerland.
This ist is covered by the Directive 2005/36/EC,



Headquarters of the



COrgarizacin Médica Coleg do
Espara, which regulates the
‘Medical profession in Spain



“Medical ethics is a system of moral principles that apply values and judgments to the practice of
medicine, As a scholarly discipline, medical ethies encompasses ls practical application in ll
ts history, philosophy, theology, and sociology. Six ofthe values that commonly apply to medical
ethics discussions are:

autonomy ~ the patient has the right to refuse or choose their treatment. (Latin: Voluntas aegroti
syprema lex.)
+ beneficence ~ a practitioner should actin the best interest ofthe patient. (Latin: Salus aegroti
suprema lex.)
+ justice ~ concerns the distribution of scarce health resources, and the decision of who gets what
treatment (faimess and equality)

+ non-maleficence ~



rst, do no harm” (Latin: primum non-nocere).

+ respect for persons ~ the patient (and the person treating the patient) have the right to be
treated with dignity.

' truthfulness and honesty ~ the concept of informed consent has increased in importance since the
historical events of the Doctors’ Trial of the Nuremberg trials, Tuskegee syphilis experiment, and
others,
‘Values such as these do not give answers as to how to handle a particular situation, but provide a
useful framework for understanding conflicts. When moral values ate in conflict, the result may be
an ethical dilemma or crisis, Sometimes, no good solution to a
dilemma in medical ethics exists, and occasionally, the values of the medical community (Le, the
hospital and is staff) conflict with the values of the i

providers oF among family members, For example, some argue thatthe principles of autonomy and
beneficence clash when patients refuse

History

blood wansfu





vidual patient, family, or larger non-medical community. Conflicts can also arise between health
care
1, considering them life-saving; and tuth-elling was not emphasized to a large extent before the HIV



cal settings as well as work on



A2i-century
‘manuscript ofthe Hippocratic
oath







Ancient world

Prehistoric meu



Ine incorporated plants (herbalism, animal parts, and minerals. In many cases these materials were
used ritually as magical substances by priests, sh
Inanimate objects having spi), spiritualism (an appeal to gods or communion with ancestor spirits);
shamanism (the vesting of an individual with mys

‘ways In which culture and society are organized around or impacted by issues of health, health care
and related issues

“The earliest known medical texts inthe world were found inthe ancient Syrian city of Ebla and date
back wo 2500 BCE !54%5126 oer early records on medicine have been discovered from ancien Egyptian
medicine, Babylonian Medicine, Ayurvedic

the Indian subcontinent), classical Chinese medicine (Alternative medicine) predecessor tothe modern
traditional Chinese medicine), anda

medicine (

In Egypt, Imhotep (2rd millennium BCE) is the first physician in history known by name. The oldest
Egyptian medical text Is the



dating back to 1600 BCE isan early workon surgery, while the Ehers Papyrus dating back o 1500 BCE is
akin to a textbook on medicine! 27!

In China, archaclogical evidence of medicine in Chinese dats back to the Bronte Age Shang dynasty,
based on seeds fr hebalsm and tols presumed to have been used fr surgery!!! The Huangdi Neiing, the
progenitor of Chinese medicine, ia medial

text written beginning



In nda, the oldest known surgical text, the Sushruta Samhita writen by the surgeon Sushruta,
described numerous surgical operations, including the ears forms of plastic surgery 38 well as
methods of strlization for surgical instruments 81 The eriest
records of dedicated hospitals come from Mihntale in St Lanka where evidence of dedicated



In Greece, the ancient Greek physician Hippocrates, the "father of modern medicine"

the 2nd century BCE and compiled in the 3ed century 1









decline in Western Europe, although it continued uninterrupted in the Eastern Roman (Byzantine)
Empl.

Most of our knowledge of ancient Hebrew medicine during the 1st mill
medicine started in the Byzantine Era, withthe physician Asaph the Jew.



Middle Ages

‘After 750 CE, the Mus!



‘Amanuscript of A-Résalaha-Dhahabiah
by All ab Ridha, the eighth mar

‘Muslims The text says: "Golden
{ssertaton in medicine whichis sen by
Imam All ibn Musa a-Ridha, peace be
upon fim, to a-Matmun:





‘Mansuri, namely "On Surger



Kahun Gynaecol

Kahun, Gynaecological Papyrus

or medicine





nt Greek medicine and Roman medicine,



2]

nedicinal treatment facilities for patients are found 11421

{8144 jaa the foundation fora rational approach to medicine. Hippocrates Intoduced the Hippocratic
Oath fr physicians, which is stil relevant and in use
today, and was the fist to categorize illnesses as acute, chronic, endemic and epdemic, and use
terms suchas, "exacerbation, relapse, resolution, criss, paroxysm, peak, and convalescence” SH The
Greek physician Galen was also one ofthe
greatest surgeons of the ancient world and performed many audacious operations, including brain and
eye surgeries After the fall ofthe Western Roman Empire andthe onset ofthe Early Middle Ages, the
Grek tadlton of medicine wen



[BC comes from the Torah, Le. the Five Books of Moses, which contain various health related laws and
rituals. The Hebrew contribution tothe development of modem.

‘The concept of hospital as institution to offer medical care and possibilty of a cure for the
patients due to the ideals of Churistian charity, rather than just merely a place to die, appeared
in the Byzant
(a8)

Although the concept of uroscopy was known to Galen, he did not see the importance of using it to
localize the disease. It was under the Byzantines with physicians such of Theophilus Protospatharius

(3)

that they realized the potential in uroscopy to determine disease ina ime when no micrascope or
stethoscope existed. That practice eventually spread tothe rest of Europe.)

n world had the works of Hippocrates, Galen and Susheuta translated into Arable, and Islamic
physicians engaged in some significant medical research, Notable Islamic medical





and



ovever te fourteenth and fteenth century Black Death devastated oth the Middle East and Europe, and
it has even been argued that Western Europe was generally
from the pandemic than the Middle East! In the early modem period, important eal figures in medicine
and anatomy emerged in Europe, including Gable Fllopio and Willan Harvey,

152] owbers



nclude Abuleasis|52) Avenzoa







In Europe, Charlemagne decred that a hosp shouldbe attached to each cathedral and monastery andthe
historian GeoteyBlaiey likened the actives of the Catholic Church
state: "It conducted hospi for theo and orphanages forthe young: hospces forthe sckof all ages
places for ie lepers and hostels or lis where plgims ould buy cheap bed and mea. supplied food to
the population during {a
Glstibuted food to the pot. This welfare stem the church funded though cllecing taxes on a lange
scale and possessing large farmlands and ees. The Bene

growing medical herbs and becoming te chief mecical caregivers of ter dirs, as atte great Abbey of
Cluny. The Church also established a network of cathedral schools and universes where medicine was
studled, The Schola Medica
Salemitana in Salem, looking tthe learning of Greek and Arab physicians, grew tobe ibe finest medal
school in medieval Europe!





‘The major shift in medical thinking was the gradual rejection, especially during the Black Death in
the 14th and 15th centuries, of what may be called the "waditional author
and medicine. This was the notion that because some prominent person in the past said something must
be so, then that was the way It was, and anything one observed to the contrary was an anomaly
(which was paralleled by a similar shift in European society in general - see Copernicus rejection
of Ptolemy's theories on astronomy). Physicians like Vesallus improved upon or disproved some of
the theories from the past. The main tomes used both by medicine students and expert physicians were
Materia Medica and Pharmacopoeta

Andreas Veslus was the author of De human! corporsfabrica, an important book on human anatomy !
Bacteria and micoorganlsms were first observed with a microscope by A



Leeuwenboel in 1676, inating the scenic flld microbiology Independently from Ibn al-Nafis, Michael
Serves rediscovered the pulmonary ctculauon, butts discovery didnot reach the
public because it was writen down forthe fist time in the "Manuscript of Pars! in 1546, nd ltr
published inthe theological work for which he pld wih his Me n 153, Later this was described by
Renaldus Calumbus and Andrea

father of physiology” due to his exemplary teaching in Leiden and textbook Institutiones medicae’
(1708), Pierre Fauchard has been called "the father of modem dentistry”

Cesalpino, Herman Boethaave is sometimes referred to as a



Modern

Veterinary medicine was, for the first
humans and other animals,

Modern scientific biomedical research (where results are testable and reproducible) began to replace
early Western traditions based on herbalism, the Greek "four humours" and other such pre-madern
notions. The modern era really began with Edward

Jenner's discovery of the smallpox vaccine atthe end of the 18th century (inspired by the method of
vat bert Koch's discoveries around 1890 ofthe transmission of disease by bacteria, and then the
discovery

of antibiotics around 1900.

‘The post-18th century modernity period brought more groundbreaking researchers from Europe. From
Germany and Austia, dectors Rudolf Vigchow, Wilhelm Conrad Rontgen, Karl Landsteiner and Otto Loewi
made notable contributions, Inthe
United Kingdom, Alexander Fleming, Joseph Lister, Francis Crick and Florence Nightingale are
considered important. Spanish doctor Santiago Ramén

ral

lation originated in ancient China),”"!





me, truly separated from human medicine in 1761, when the French veterinarian Claude Bourgelat
founded the world’s frst veterinary school in Lyon, France. Before this, medical doctors treated
both



(Cajal is considered the father of moder





From New Zealand and Australia came Maurice Wikins, Howard Florey, and Frank Macfarlane Burel

Others that did significant work include William Williams Keen, Wiliam Coley, James D, Watson
(United Stats); Salvador Luria (tay); Alexandre Yersin (Switzerland); Kitasato Shibasaburd (Japan);
Jean-Martin Charcot, Claude Berard, Paul Broca

en, Well-known spiritual systems include animism (the notion of
nagically obtaining the ruth). The field of medical anthropology examines the

cal Papyrus from around 2000 BCE, which describes gynaecological diseases. The Edwin Smith Papyrus



more effective in recovering



‘Statutte of ancient Egyptian
piysican Imhotep, the rst
physician from antiquay known
by name








‘Mosaic on the floor of the Asclepieon of Kos,
depicting Hippocrates, with ASKIepUS inthe
mide 2nd-3rd century)

ploneers include the Persian polymath, Avicenna, who, along with Imbotep and Hippocrates, has also
been called the Taher of medicine” {I He wrote The Canon of Medicine which became a standard

‘medical text at many medieval European univesites/5! considered one of the most famous books in te
history of medic Amica Avena

Averroes 8 Persian physician Rhazes!7l was one of the firs to question the Greek theory of humors
General Book on Therapy”, became part ofthe medical cuticuum

ophthalmology. For example, he was the frst o recognize the reaction ofthe eye's pupil olght!"! The
Persian Bimaristan hospitals were an early example of public hospitals

Ibn al-Nafis51 and

Which nevertheless remained influential in both medieval Wester and medieval Islamic medicine.58)
Some volumes of Rhazes's work Al-

European universces®) Adduonally, he hasbeen described as a doctors doctor!" the father of
pediatrics!
tse

(S761)



and a ploneer of

heath care during the Middle Ages to an early version of a welfare
ne and



ine order was noted for seting up hospitals and infirmarles in their monasteries,

approach o science







Siena’ Santa Maria dela Seala Hospital one of
Europe's oldest hospitals. During the Mile
‘Ages, the Catholic Church established
Universities to revive the study of sciences,
raving onthe learning of Greek and Arab
physicians inthe study of medicine





(France); Adolfo Lutz Brazil); Nikolai Korotkov (Russia); Sir William Osler (Canada); and Harvey
Cushing (United States)

As science and technology developed, medic



became more relant upon medleations, Throughout history and in Europe ight unl the late 18h century,
not only plant products were used as medi
and flds 7 phamacology developed in part frm herbalism and some digs are stil derived tom plants
(trope, eee, wararin, asin, gon, inca lala





PPaubLouis Sond injecting a plague
waccin in Karach, 1898,



, but also animal (including human) body pars
| axol,hyoscne et). Vacines were discovered by Edward Jenner and Louis Pasteur

‘The frst antibiotic was arsphenamine (Salvarsan) discovered by Paul Ehrlich in 1908 after he
observed that bacteria took up toxic dyes that human cells did not. The frst major class of
antibiotics was the sulfa drugs, derived by German chemists originally from azo dyes.

Pharmacology has become increasingly sophisticated; modern biotechnology allows drugs targeted
towards specific physiological processes to be developed, sometimes designed for compatibility with
the body to reduce side-effects. Genomics and
volution is having increasingly significant influence on medicine, as the causative genes of most
monogenic genetic disorders have now been Identified, and the development of techniques in molecular

knowledge of human genetics and human



biology, evolution, and genetics ae influencing medical technology, practice and decision-making,

Evidence-based medicine is a contemporary movement to establish the most effective algorithms of
practice (ways of doing things) through the use of systematic reviews and meta-analysis, The
movement i facilitated by modem global
Science, which allows as much of the available evidence as possible o be collected and analyzed
according to standard protocols that are then disseminated to healthcare providers. The Cochrane
Collaboration leads this movement. A 2001 review of

160 Cochrane systematic reviews revealed that, according to two readers, 21.3% ofthe reviews
concluded insufficient evidence, 2094 concluded evidence of no effect, and 22.5% concluded positive
effect 41

Quality, efficiency, and access

formation









Evidence-based medicine, prevention of medical error (and othe

1)

the United States where healthcare is regarded as excessively costly but population health metrics
lag similar nations 75)

Health spending varies by county, which results in differences in acess to care and access to
medicines!"®177Islatth care rationing Varies by country. Most developed counties provide health care
o all eltzens, with a few exceptions such a the

United States where restrictions on health insurance coverage may limi affordably 1

Telemedicine

rogenesis"), and avoidance of unnecessary health care ae a priority in modern medical systems. These
topics generate significant political and public policy atention, particularly in



pharmaceutical factory in Tam
Finland in 1983







‘Telemedicine (also Telehealth) refers to preventive, promotive, and curative care deliver, i



uding remote clinical services, such as diagnosis, monitoring, administration and provider education
721291 The mi





n categories of telehealth:

+ Telenursing is experiencing significant growth globally due to factors such asthe need to reduce
healthcare costs, an increasing aging and chronicalyil population, and expanded healthcare coverage
to stant, ual, small or sparsely populated regions
Telenursing can help adcress nurse shortages, reduce travel ime and distances, and minimize hospital
admisions ©

+ Telepaliative care is a remote approach to optimising quality of life and relieving sutfering for
people with serious, complex and often fatal ilnesses. The World Health Organization (WHO)
recommends integrating palliative care as early as possible for any chronic
and fatal ness. Telepaliatve care typically utilizes telecommunication technologies like video
conferencing, messaging for follow-ups, and digital symptom assessments through questionnaires that
generate alerts for healthcare professionals ©

+ Telepharmacy involves delivering pharmaceutical care via telecommunications to patents in
locations where rect contact with a pharmacist may not be possible or ict 1

+ Telepsychitry(telemental health) uses telecommunications technology to provide remote psychiatic
cre for ndviduals with mental health conditions 41

+ Telepsychology is the use of communication technology for the remote administration of
psychological tests and psychotherapy:

9)

+ Teleneurotherapy ulizes computers and communications technology to deliver neurotherapy remately
5] Research indicates thal systematic physical stimuli rom standard electronic devices, such as
tablets with headphones, may teat njured nervous systems

‘online by modulating neuron

research has shown therapeutic effects when implementing the APIN method in the online treatment of
patients with various neurological conditions. 2127188189)

+ Telenutition refers to the use of video conferencing or telephony to provide online consultations
by nutritionists or dieticians.

(20)

plasticity. Evidence suggests that teleneuratherapy could enhance neurological treatment it
itincorporates the therapeutic effect of a systematic abiotic impact of physical forces with key
parameters of mather-felus interaction. Recent

+ Telerehabiltation (or e-rehabiltation) is the delivery of rehabilitation services over
telecommunication networks and the Internet. Most services fall into two categories: clinical
assessment (evaluating the patient's functional abilties in their environment) and clinical

therapy.

See also





+ Alternative medicine ~ Unscientific healthcare practices
+ List of causes of death by rate

+ List of disorders

+ List of important publications in medicine

+ Lists of diseases

+ Medical aid ~ Type of insurance



+ Medical biling ~ Part of the US health system's reimbursement process -

Notes

= Medical classification



Use of schemes of standardized codes -

= Medical encyclopedia ~ Written compendium about diseases = Philosophy of healthcare
= Medical equipment ~ Device to be used for medical purposes -

= Medical ethics ~ System of moral principles of the practice of medicine = Telehealth

= Medical literature ~ Scientific literature of medicine = Traditional medic!

= Medical malpractice ~ Legal cause of action



Medical sociology ~ Branch of sociology

{Quackery Promotion of fraudulent or ignorant medical practices











= Formalized folk medicine

= Zoopharmacognosy ~ Self-medication by animals

Medical psychology — Application of psychological principles to the practice
aimee





a. Etymology: Latin: medicna, trom ars medizna the medical art, om meaicus ‘physician Ct. mederi to
hes



" elym. ‘know the best course for’, from PIE base *med- ‘to measure, limit’. Ct. Greek: medos
‘counsel, plan’, Avestan: vi-mad ‘physician’

'b. Michael Dols has shown that the Black Death was much more commonly believed by European
authorities than by Middle Eastern authorities to be contagious; as a resut, fight was more commonly
counseled, and in urban Italy quarantines were organized on a

‘much wider level than in urban Egypt or Syria!

References





1. Firth 2 (2020). "Science in medicine: when, how, and what’.
Oxford textbook of medicine. Oxtord: Oxford University
Press. ISBN 978-0-19-874669-0.

2. Saunders J (June 2000). "The practice of clinical medicine as
anart and as a science” (htips:/ivwwuncbi.nim.nih.govipmela
rticles/PMC1071282). Med Humanit. 26 (1): 18-22.
doi:10.1136/mh.26.1.18 (https//doi.org/10.1136%2Fmh 26.1.
18), ISSN 1468-215x (hitps://search.worldcat orgiissn/1468-
215x). PMC 1071282 (hitps:/iwnw.nebi.nim.nih.govipmclartic
les/PMC1071282). PMID 12484313 (htips:/ipubmed.ncbi.n|
‘mnih.govi1 2484313). S2CID 73306806 (hitps:/api.semantic
scholar orgiCorpusiD: 73306806)

3. "Dictionary, medicine” (hitps/dictionary reference.com/brows,
elmedicine). Archived (hitps:/iweb.archive.orghweb/20160304
154536/hti:/idicionary.reference.com/browselmedicine)
item the orginal on 4 March 2016: Retioved 2 December
2013,

4. "Medicine. n.1"(hitp:imww oed.comiview/Entry1157157resul
ary = 2Wovea)"OFD Onine:Ontord Utrera Press, /=YZWqVc8). OED Online. Oxford University Press.
‘September 2014. Archived (https:/web.archive.orghweb/2021
O5103084ehtps lnvoed com/sart)sessone1EOE 738
92225A3E7ECBE73A292FDFOD ?authRejection=trueeuri=%6
2 viewSi2FEnty®:2F115715963Fesult4S019626rskeySD
‘YZWqVe) from the original on 18 August 2021. Retrieved
B November 2014,

5. "Medicine" (ntps:/veb archive. orgiweb/20141006135132/htt
pulwunw.oxfordaictionaries.com/definition/englsh/medicine?q
medicine). Oxford Dictionaries Online. Oxford University
Press. Archived from the original (htp://oxforddictionaries.co

‘midefinition/medicine?q=medicine) on 6 October 2014.
Retieved 8 November 2014

6. "medicine" (htps:/iveb archive.orglweb/20071011122928/htt
puetymonine comin oniermanede) pm Onin /monline.comindex php?term=medicine). Etym. Online.
Archived from the original (hitp:/Wwwnw.etymonline.comvindex.
phovtermemedicne) on 1 Onber 2007

7. "Medicine" (htps:/iweb archive.orglweb/20071011122928/htt
pilletymoniine.convindex.php?term=medicine). Online
Etymology Dictionary. Archived from the original (http:Jhww.

etymonline.corwindex.php2term=medicine) on 11 October
2007.

8. "physic" (https://dol.org/10.1093/0£D/6103370834). Oxford
English Dictionary (Online ed.) Oxford University Press.
o10.1093/£0/6103370834 (nts:Ido org/1610939%2FO

D9%2F6103370834). (Subscription or participating institution









‘membership (tips:/iwwaw.0ed.com/publicNogirvlogginginsuithyo
rlibrary) required.)

9. "Traditional medicine: growing needs and potential’. WHO
Policy Perspectives on Medicines. No. 2. World Health
‘Organization. 2002. hal:10685/67294 (https:/Ihdl handle.nev1.
0665942F57294)
EI Dib RP, Alallah AN, Andriolo RB (August 2007). "Mapping
the Cochrane evidence for decision making in health care”.
Journal of Evaluation in Clinical Practice. 13 (4): 689-692.
doi:10,1111),1365-2753,2007,.00886.x (https: f/do\.org/L0.111,
{12} 1368-2783 2007 00886») PMID 17683315 (Ntps pu
ibmed ncbisnim nih gov!17683915
Coulehan JL, Block MR (2005). The Medical Interview:
‘Mastering Skill for Clinical Practice (Sth ed.). F.A. Davis.
ISBN 978-0-8036-1246-4, OCLC 232304025 (hitps:lisearch,
Worldcat. orgloclc(232304023),
‘Addison K, Braden JH, Cupp JE, Emmert D, Hall LA, Hall,

et al. (September 2008). "Update: guidelines for defining the
legai health record oir purposes (ps ved ae purposes” (htips:/iveb archi
‘ve.org/web/20080309002938/http:library.ahima.orglxpediok
Toupsipubictdocumentsiahimalbok1_027021 hespdDocNa
‘me=bok1_027921). Journal of AHIMA. 76 (8): 64A - 4G.
PMID 16245584 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nim.nih.gov/1624558
4), Archived from the original (hitpsibrary.ahima.org/xpedio!
‘groups/public/documents/ahima/bok1_ 027921, hesp?dDocNa
‘me=bokl_027921) on 9 March 2008.

Nordavist C (26 August 2009). "What Are Symptoms? What
‘Are Signs?" (https:/iveb. archive. orgiweb/20140701123344/ht

{p:imwwsmedicalnewstoday.comvarticles/161858.php).
Heal News Today. cived tom he ogia ‘News Today. Archived from the original (htp:/www.
imedicalnewstoday com/ariles/161858:php) on 1 July 2014
"Assessing patients effectively: Here's how to do the basic
four techniques” (hitps:lidoi.org/10.1097%2F00152193-2006
11002-00008). Nursing2014. 8 (2): 6. 2008.
doi:10,1097/00152193-200611002-00005 (https:/doi.org/10.
41097%2F00152193-200611002-00005).
‘Clinical examination” (https://medical-dictionary.thefreedictio
‘nary. com/Clinicalexamination#:~text=including%20some%
2Dtests.-,The%20examination, and%20blood%20pressure%6E
29%80%94are%420recorded.). The Free Dictionary. Archivec
iapstlaeb arch opie ‘orgiweb/20210204001630/hitps://medica
[-dictionary.thefreedictionary.com/Clinical+ examination#~:tex
icluding%420some%20tests.-, he%20examination.and962
Oblood?620pressure%se296809694are%420recorded.) from the
original on 4 February 2021. Retrieved 18 January 2021.
Grembowski DE, Diehr P, Novak LC, Roussel AE, Martin DP,
Paltick DL, et al. (August 2000). "Measuring the
"managedness” and covered benefits of health plans” (ht
Tian ncbi nm nih govipmcariclesIPMCL0B8144). Heath
Senices Research. 6 (2). 707-734. PMC 1089144 (hts!
\wunwzncbi.nim.nih.gov/pmelarticles/PMC1089144)

PMID 10966092 (hitps://pubmed.ncbi.nim.nih.gov/1096609,
2).

Blainey G 2013), A Shor History of Christianity. Penguin
Mang OCLe 793002685 (nips serch word orglock/78

3902685).
Insuring America's Health: Principles and
Recommendations” (iips/veb archive-orgweb/200010191

(03757ihttp:/iwwnw.iom.eduReports!2004/Insuring-Americas-H
gales and Reconmendatons.aspy) site of jes-and-Recommendations.aspx). Institute of
Medicine ai the National Academies of Science. 14 January
2004. Archived from the original (http:)wwiom.edu/Reports!
2004/Insuring- Americas: Health-Principles-and-Recommenda
tions.aspx) on 19 October 2009.

Battista JR, McCabe J (4 June 1999). “The Case For Single
Payer, Universal Health Care for the United States” (htipsiw
eb.archive.orgiweb/20180423105127/ttp/ethealth.server10
JL.comithe_case_for_uriversal health _care_in_the united_st
ates.hir). Cthealth Server101.com. Archived from the original
(hipsietheathservert01.comthe. case for universal health

10.

a.

12.



13.

14.



15.

16.



a.

18.



19.

“care_in_the_united_staies him) on 23 Apr’2018. Retrieved
May 2009.

20. Sipkotf M (January 2004). "Transparency called key to uniting

cost control, quality improvement (htip:/iwww.managedcare
tna eonfarctves)Os0L/0401 trum Min) Managed Care.

13 (1): 38-42. PMID 14763279 (hitips:/pubmed.ncbi.nim.nin.
jov/14763278). Archived (https:/iveb archive.orgiweb/20040
3716042 1ihtp wun manayedcaremag.corarchives/O401/
(0401 forum hui) fom the orginal on 17 February 2004.

Retrieved 16 April 2006.
Calnan M (2015). Collyer F (ed.). "Eliot Freidson:
‘Sociological Narratives of Professionalism and Modern
Medicine” (hitp:/link.springer.com/10.1057/9781137355621,
19). The Palgrave Handbook of Social Theory in Health,
lines and Medicine. London: Palgrave Macmillan UK.

pp. 287-305. doi:10,105719781137355621_19 (hitps:lidol.or

/10.10579%2F9781137355621_19). ISBN 878-1-349-47022-
petived predate pe tps fiweb. archive; orgweb/2022031417174Uhit
ps:/link.springer.com/chapter/10.1057/9781137355621_19)
fom the orginal on 14 March 2032. Retieved 6 November
2021.

22. "Primary, Secondary and Tertiary HealthCare ~ Arthapedia”
(hip:ivniwarthapediainindex phipssaFes<aDPrimary. Se
ondary and: Terlary HealthCare). wiwwarthapedain
archived (hts eb archive orgveb/20210126011946/ntt
pilviv.arthapedia.nfindex php%aFile=Primany Secondar

y_and_Tertiary. HealthCare) from the original on 28 January
2021. Retrieved 19 January 2021.

23. "Types of health care providers: MedlinePlus Medical
Encyclopedia’ (https:/imediineplus.gov/ency/article/001933.ht
‘m), mediineplus.gov. Archived (hitps:/iweb.archive.orgiweb/2
(0210123051332ihtps:/medlineplus goviency/aricie/001933,
him) from the original on 23 January 2021. Retrieved
19 January 2021.



21.



24, "Secondary Health Care” (hitps:internationalmedicalcorps.or
i ulduhat te dolal-emergencesocumndaryhealtvearor =
t= Secondaryé2orealty«20Care%201s%20the,mosi96200t
ten%Z0provided%420in%s20hospitals.). International Medical
Corps. Archived (htps:/eb archive-orgiweb/202101170300
<4Uhtps:internationaimedicalcorps.org.uklwhat-we-dovall-em
ergencies/secondary health-care’.~text=Secondary%20Hea
ith9s20Cares420is9420the most%420often%s20provided%20i
1n%20hospitals.) from the original on 17 January 2021.
Retrieved 19 January 2021
LLaokri S, Weil 0, Drabo KM, Dembelé SM, Kafando B,
Dujardin 8 (Apri 2013). "Removal of user fees no guarantee
of universal health coverage! observations fom Burkina
Faso” (hps:iwuwarcbi.ni.nih.govipmclaricles/PMC36294
51). Bulletin ofthe World Health Organization. 91 (@): 277—
£282, doi:10.2471/BL.12.110015 (hiis:doLorg/10.2471942F
BLT.12.110015). PMG 3629451 (hitps:iwww.nebini.rih.go
\ipmelaricles/PMIC3629451), PMID 23599551 (hips:/fpubm
‘ednbirim nif. 9ov/2359958:).
Chou ¥3, Yip WC, Lee CH, Huang N, Sun YP, Chang H
(September 2003). "impact of separating drug prescribing
and dispensing on provider behaviour: Taiwan's experience"
(hitps:i/do\.org/10,1093%2Fneapol¥42Fczg038). Health
Policy and Planning. 18 (3): 316-329,
ddoi:10,109a/heapolle2g038 (hips sido org/10.1099%42Fheap
(0862Fe2g038). PMID 12917273 (htps:/pubmed.ncbi.nim.ni
h.govll2917273).
27. "What are the surgical specialties?” (htps:/hwwnfacs.orgledu
cation/resources/mecical-students/laq/specialiest:~text=Th
e%20Americand620College%2001%20Surgeons surgery%52
3620otorhinolaryngology*42C¥420pediatric%420surgery%2
©), American College of Surgeons. Archived (hips: web arch
ive orgweb/20210122184813Mhtips Thww facs.org/educatio
ilresources/medicalstudents/iag/specialies#:~text=The%62
‘DAmericand620College%2001%20Surgeons, surgery%2C%20
aiothinolaryngology%2C%20pediatic%s20surgery%62C) from
the original on 22 January 2021. Retrieved 18 January 2021.
Culyer AJ (81 July 2014). The Dictionary of Health
Economics, Third Edition (httpssfbooks.google.combooks id
ELUGBAAAQEA299=PA339) Chelthenham, UK Edward
Elgar Publishing. p. 335. ISBN 978-1-78100-199-8. Archived
tis: web archive.orgiweb/20210816030924/hips wg
‘agle.co.nvbooks/edition/The_Dictionary_of Health Econom
ics_ThirdlL UcjBAAAQBAJ?hi=enagopv=1&dq=medical+spec
ialty+dealing+ith+the-prevention®2C +diagnasis%s2C+and+
‘reatment+of+adult+diseases&pg=PAS35&prinisec=frontcove
‘tom the original on 18 August 2021. Relieved 18 anuary.
2021.
29, “internal medicine” (nips:IWweb.archive.orghweb2009062822
‘¥336hhtp:Timinw.mercksource comipplusienslens_hi_dorland
5 spl jsp?pg-fppdocstus/eommondoviands/dolandiiveroo0

(063883,him) at Dorland’s Medical Dictionary

Fowler HW (1994). A Dictionary of Modern English Us
(Wordsworth Caton (wordsvonColeton (ips fordsworth Collection) (hts: /larch
ive.org/detallsidictionaryofmo0Ofew!). NTC/Contemporary
Publishing Company. ISBN 978-1-85326-318-7.

431. "The Royal Australasian College of Physicians: What are
Physicians?" (itpsiiveb archive orglveb/200803060S3048/
hitp:/inwwracp.edu.aulindex.clm objectid=49EF 1EBS-2A57-

5487-D74DBAFBAE9143A3). Royal Australasian College of

Physicians. Archived from the original (hitp:/iwew.racp.edu.a

tlindex.clm7objectid=49EF1EBS-2A57-5487-D74DBAFBAES

114303) on 6 March 2008. Retrieved 5 February 2008,

“therapeutics (medicine)” (htips:fiveb archive. orgiweb/20071

218085231 /htps: vw britannica,com/eblaricle-91061762q

UUery=Therapeutics&ct=). Britannica Online Encyclopedia,

‘Archived from the original (https:/iwww.brtannica.com/eblart

cle-91061767query=Therapeutics&ct=) on 18 December
2007. Retrieved 21 April 2012.

Brooks S, Biala N, Arbor S (March 2018). "A searchable
database of medical education objectives - creating a
comparable gold standard” (htips:/ivww.ncbi.nim.nih.gov/pm
‘articles PMCSE30091)- BMC Medical Education. 181) 31.
‘dok:10.1186/s12909-018-1136-z (hitps:/idoi.org/10.1186%2F
S1p90d.018-1136-2) PMC S830001 (pst naam
h.govipmclarticles/PMC5833091). PMID 29499684 (hitps:/p
itbmed-nebinim nih gov?2040068)——

Radner K, Robson E (22 September 2011). The Oxford
Handbook of Cuneiform Culture (hitps:/Ibooks.google.com/bo
ks ?id=Nvgz3NQuoSECadg=oldest+medical+recipes+ebla&
pg=PA690). OUP Oxford. ISBN 978-0-19-955730-1. Archived
(https:iweb archive. orgiweb/2024022715461 7/htips:/books.
{gogle. com/books id= Nvgz3NOuoSEC&dq=oldest+medical

Fecipes*ebla&pg=PA690) from the original on 27 February
2024. Retrieved 26 December 2023.

Vogel WH, Berke A (2008). Brief History of Vision and Ocular
Medicine (httsMoooks google comMbodks2id=t_SpzrF190cC
‘aig-oldest+medicalveblatpg-PA16). Kugler Publications.
IsBh 97660 c206-220..acved(h 378 90:629.220-1 archived (nips: archive orn
(2b/202402270838 15ihtips:/fbooks.google,com/books?id=t_5
fir LQoccedg-ldestnedcaletadog-PAl6) for he ig=oldest+ medical+ebla&pg=PA16) from the
original on 27 February 2024, Retrieved 26 December 2023.

25,





45, Garrison FH (1966). History of Medicine. Philadelphia: WB.
Saunders Company. p. 87.

46, MartInafez F (1961). A Prelude to Medical History. New
York: MD Publications, Inc. p. 90. Library of Congress ID: 61-
iz,

47. Valstub S, A Denman M, Naparstek Y, Gilon D (2008).
“Medicine” (hitps:/iwvwwjewishvirtuallbrary.orglsource/udaic
‘Blejud_0002_0013_0_13493.himi). Encyclopaedia Judaica.
“The Gale Group. Archived (htps:/iveb.archive.orgweb/2015
0518071642: siwww jewishuirtualibraryorgjsource/udaic
‘a/ejud_0002_0013_0_13493.himi) from the orginal on 18
May 2015. Retrieved 27 August 2014.

48, Lindberg D (1992). The Beginnings of Western Science (http

Sillarchive orgidetails/beginningsofwestOOlind). University of
‘Chicago Press. p. 349 (hitps:l/archive.org/detailsIbeginningso
‘westOOlind/page/349). ISBN 978-0-226-48231-6,

49. Prioreschi P (2004). A History of Medicine: Byzantine and
Islamic medicine. Horatius Press. p. 146,

50. Becka J (January 1980). "The father of medicine, Avicenna,
in our science and culture. Abu Ali ibn Sina (880-1037).
‘Casopis Lekaru Ceskych (in Czech). 119 (1): 17-23.

PMID 6989499 (htips/pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.govi6989499)

51. “Avicenna 980-1037" (https:/Wweb.archive.org/web/20081007
(970250/htp:hcs.osu.eduihorthistoryl023.himi)
Hcs.osu.edu. Archived from the original (htp:/hcs.osu.edufh
‘orthistory/023.himl) on 7 October 2008, Retrieved
19 January 2010.

52. ""The Canon of Medicine" (work by Avicenna)” (hitps:/iweb.a
‘hive. orghveb/20080528230506/htips: www. britannica. com!
ebjtopic-82902/The-Canon-of Medicine). Encyclopaedia
‘Britannica. 2008. Archived from the original (https JAwenw.brita
nnica.com/ebitopic-$2902/The-Canon-of-Medicine) on 28
May 2008. Retrieved 11 June 2008.

53. Ahmad Z (2007). "Al-Zahrawi ~The Father of Surgery". ANZ
Journal of Surgery. 77 (Suppl. 1): AB3. doi:10.1111),1445-
2197.2007.04130_ 8.x (htips/idoi org/i0.1111%2F} 1445-219
72007.04130_8.x). S2CID 57308997 (htips/api.semanticsc
holar.org/Corpusib'57308997).

54. Abdel-Halim RE (November 2006). "Contributions of
Muhadhdhab Al-Deen Al-Baghdadi to the progress of
medicine and urology. A study and translations from his book
‘Al-Mukhtar’. Saudi Medical Journal. 27 (11): 1631-1641.
PMID 17106533 (hitps://pubmed ncbi.nim.nih.gov!1710653
3.

55. "Chairman's Reflections: Traditional Medicine Among Gulf,

‘abs, Part I Bloodeting” (hep iveb achive orgiweb/201
'30308101134thtp/w scribd comidoc/78110229/Tradtion
‘al-Medicine-Among-Gulf Arabs). Heart Views. 5 (2): 74-85
[80]. 2004. archived from the original (htips:/imww.scribd.co
tmidoe/78110223/Traditional-Medicine-Among-Gul-Arabs) on
‘B March 2013.

56. Martin-Araguz A, Bustamante-Martinez C, Femandez-
‘Armayor Ajo V, Moreno-Martinez JM (1 May 2002)."
[Neuroscience in Al Andalus and its influence on medieval
‘scholastic medicine)". Revista de Neurologia (in Spanish). 34
(@): 877-892, doi:10.33588/m.3409,2001382 (nitps:/dol.orgl
10.2a600%42¢m.3409 2001382). PMID 12134358 (hpsipub
imed ncbi.rim nih. gov/12134355).

57. Tschanz DW (2003). "Arab(?) Roots of European Medicine”
(hitp:hvww.saudiaramcoworid.comiissue/199703/he.arab ro
‘ts.of.european.medicine him). Heart Views. 4 (2). archived
(https: siveb. archive.orgiweb/20040503004153/http iiwwnw sa
udiaramcoworid.comissue/199703ithe.arab.roots.of.europea
‘nmedicine him) from the original on 3 May 2004. Retrieved
‘9 June 2013. copy (hitp:/coursesa matrix msu.edu~fsherhhs
1372/readings/tschanz. html) Archived (htips:Jiveb.archive.or
‘gweb/20041130161059/hitp:/coursesa. matrix msu.edul-fish
er/hst372/readingsitschanz.himi) 30 November 2004 at the
Wayback Machine

58. Pormann PE, Savage-Smith E (2007). "On the dominance of
the Greek humoral theory, which was the basis for the
practice of bloodletting". Medieval Islamic medicine.
Washington DC: Georgetown University. pp. 10, 43-48.

Ot 229119050 (hp open xgvasfOL12911508

59. Iskandar A (2006). "Al-Ra2I", Encyclopaedia of the history of
‘science, technology, and medicine in non-western cultures
(2nd ed). Springer. pp. 155-156.

60. Ganchy S (2008). Islam and Science, Medicine, and
Technology (https:/larchive.orgidetailslislamsciencemedi0000
‘ganc). New York: Rosen Pub.

61. Elgood C (2010). A Medical History of Persia and The
Eastern Caliphate (Ist ed.) London: Cambridge. pp. 202—
203. ISBN 978-1-108-01588-2. "By writing a monograph on
‘Diseases in Children’ he may also be looked upon as the
father of paediatrics.”

62, Micheau F (1996). "The Scientific Institutions in the Medieval
Near East’. In Rashed R, Morelon R (eds.). Encyclopedia of
the History of Avabic Science. Routledge. pp. 991-992,

63. Barrett P (2004). Science and Theology Since Copernicus:
The Search for Understanding. Continuum Intemational

'567-08969-4.











36, Page(S)htps:imew.asor orghp- a Continuum Intemational
contentuploads/2019/03/Five_Artcles_about_Drugs Medicine, alst{aeung [pan sra-nser-on90o4
100k. pdf Archived (https://web.archive.orgiweb/20240120032 ‘Arshrort History of Christianity.
Penguin

‘B50/htips:siww.asor.orgiwp-contentuploads/2019/03/Five_A
fies. about Orags: Medene Alcohol trom ANE Taday-€
book paf) 20 January 2024 at the Wayback Machine
‘Ackerknecht E (1982). A Short History of Medicine (nttps:slar
chive.org/details/shorthistoryofmeOOacke). JHU Press. p. 22
(htips:/archive.org/details/shorthistoryofmed0acke/pagel22).
ISBN 978-0-8018-272
Hong F (2004). "History of Medicine in China” (https:/iweb.ar
chive.orgiweb/201312012312 1@/http:/wuwmedicine,mcgil.c
alMJMVissuesiv08n0/erossroads/hong.pdf) (PDF). McGill
Journal of Medicine. & (1): 7984. Archived from the original (h
‘pulse megi car dissuce OBnOLteseodsT
hongpal) (PDF) onl Oecember 203
‘38, Unschuld P (2003). Huang Di Nei Jing: Nature, Kno

Imagery in an Ancient Chinese Medical Text (htips:/lb0oks.go

ogle.com/books 7id=N2Zd'PChpNIC&pg=PR9). University
California Press. p. x. ISBN 978-0-520:02849-7. Archived (ht
{psi/hweb archive.orgiweb/20160418053843/https://books.go
gle comfpooks?aNozarPCopNIcapysPR9) vom the
‘rginal on 18 Apri 2016, Retieved 14 November 2015,
Dave T, Habte A, Vora V, Sheikh MQ, Sanker V, Gopal SV (5
April 2024). "Sushtuta: The Father of Indian Surgical History”
(htips:vmwincbi.nim.rih.govipmelartcies/PMC11000756)
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery - Global Open. 12 (4)
5715, doi:10.1097/GOX,.0000000000005715 (htips:/dol.org/
110.1097%2FGOX.0000000000005715). ISSN 2169-7574 (nit

ppsillsearch worldcat.orglissrv2169-7574). PMC 11000756 (ht
{tps/iwerw.ncbi.nim.nih.gov/pmelarticles/PMIC11000756).







Viking. pp. 214-215, OCLC 793902685 (nitps:/isearch. worlde
atorg/ocic/793902685)

65. Dols MW (1977). The Black Death in the Middle East.
Princeton. pp. 119, 285-290. OCLC 2296964 (https:/search.
worldeat.orgiocicl2296964)

66. “Page through a virtual copy of Vesalius's De Humanis
Corponis Fabrica” (https:/lweb.archive.orgiweb/20141011220

74. Ezzo J, Bausell B, Moerman DE, Berman B, Hadhazy V
(2001). "Reviewing the reviews. How strong is the evidence?
How clear are the conclusions. International Journal of
Technology Assessment in Health Care. 17 (4): 457—466.
ddoi:10.1017/50266462301107014 (https:/idoi.org/10.1017%2
'50266462301107014). PMID 11758290 (https://pubmed.nc
bi:nlm.nih.gov/11758290). S2CiD 21855086 (hitps:/iapi.sema
nticscholar.org/CorpusID:21855086)
Bentley TG, Etfros RM, Palar K, Keeler EB (December 2008).
"Waste in the U.S. Health care system: a conceptual

framework” (htps:/iwww.nebinim.nih.govipmclartcles/PMC2
680367): The Mibank Quarter. 86 (8): 629-659.
doi:10.1111.1468-0008.2008.00537 x (htipsi//doi.org/t0.111
4s sb 000 200800827»). PC 2580367 (tpn 11468-0009 ,2008. 00537 x). PMC 2690367 (hitps:/iww
web nim.h govipmclartcles/PMICZ690967), =”

PMID 19120983 (hitps://pubmed ncbi.nim.nih.gov/1912098
3.

Pichon-Riviere A, Drummond M, Palacios A, Garcia-Marti S,

‘Augustovski F (2023). "Determining the efficiency path to
tniversal health coversge: coareffeciveneas theshalis tor
174 counties based ontrondh i Me expectancy arid health
expenditures” (htip:/wwwthelancet.comarticle/S2214109X2
'3001626ipdi). The Lancet Global Health. 11 (6). Elsevier BV:
2833 - e842, dol:10.1016/s2214-109x(23)00162-6 (https:/ido
\Lorg/L0,1016962Fs221.4-109x942823%42900162-6).

ISSN 2214-109x (htips:/search.worldcat.orq/issn/2214-109
X). Retrieved 1 June 2025,

"WHO | Tracking universal health coverage: 2017 Global
Monitoring Report” (htips:iveb.archive.orgiwebl2020100821
:1224hhtipsiuvewiho int/healthinfo/universal_health_covera
{gelreporv2017leni). WHO. Archived from the original (atps:/!
‘wvewwho.invhealthinfo/universal_health_coveragelrepori201
Tien!) on 8 October 2020. Retrieved 14 June 2019.

"Coverage for health care | READ online" (hitps:liread,oecd:i
ibvanrorgisocalssues migration healfveal ats glance?

OiS/coverage-for-health-care_health_glance-2015-39-en).
OECD iar Noverbe 2015, chives (ipsa rary. 4 November 2015. Archived (htips:iweb.archi
ve.orghveb/20210308132841/htips:lread.oecd library. org/so
Cia-issues-migration-health/health-ai-a-glance-2015/coverat
e-for-heaith-care_health_glance-2015-39-en) from the
original on & March 2021. Retrieved 14 June 2019.

"What is TeleHealth?” (htips:/wwaw.hrsa.govitelehealthiwhat.\
S-telehealth). Office for the Advancement of Telehealth. The
Health Resources and Services Administration. July 2025.
Retrieved 6 July 2025.

‘Shaw DK (June 2009). "Overview of telehealth

application to cardiopulmonar ical theray

‘wuncbi.nim nih, gov/pme/articles/PMC2845264)
Cardiopulmonary Physical Therapy Journal. 20 (2): 13-8.

doi:10,1097/01823246-200920020-0000 (htips:/di.org/0.
So eiaro1693%46-200920090-00008) Pc SBAsz64 ap
‘lvwww.cbi.nim.rih.govipmclariclesiPMC2845264).
MID-20467533 (tps: Jpubmed nb. rim.nh.gov2046753
3.

lurses Happier Using Telecare, Says International Surv
(hse ar ve ge 206081810 coua 35:iweb archive orgiweb/20060618103208/tp: nw. e-h
ealth.insider.cominews/item.cim?10=1263). eHealth Insider.
15 June 2005. Archived from the original (hip:/imuw.e-health
“insider.comnewssitem.cim?ID=1263) on 18 June 2006.
Retrieved 4 April 2009

Finucane AM, O'Donnell H, Lugton J, Gibson-WattT,
‘Swenson C, Pagliari C (6 April 2021). "Digital health
interventions in palitive care: a systematic meta-review" (htt
pps fiwww.ncbi.nim.nih.govipmclaricies/PMC8024378). noj
Digital Medicine. 4 (1): 64. doi 10.1038/s41746-021-00430.
(itps:idoi.org/10.1038962Fs41746-021-00430-7)

ISSN 2398-6352 (https:/isearch worldcat.org/issn/2398-635
2). PMC 8024379 (htipswww.ncbi.nim.nih. govipmclaricles!
PMiC8024378). PMID 33824407 (hitps:lipubmed.ncbi.nim.ni
hugow33824407).

Lowry SJ, Kay CN, Marsom EN, Park JS, Poole S, Page AT

(250) phy heath casones is prams sivered
See ee ee eet ee
Sorat nels mms area men Ie
ee me ee oe

Sei Lo pe eee ba obi oer 3605
ISSN 1445-937X (https://search.worldcat.orglissn/1445-937
‘sID:225070505).

Schuster Riser E, tnsenC, NapraikN, Rockige 5,
Seger til (005 Blog ines ned ante
Sten ae ee
ST Ee te

pis:/imwwwnebi.nlm.nih, govipmelarticles/PMC9204733)
Internet Interventions. 29 100551.

doi:10.1016).invent.2022, 100581 (htps:ldoiorg/10.1016%2
F.invent 2022 100581). PMC 8204733 (htps: ww. ncbi nim.
nih.govipmerariclesiPM(C9204733). PMID 35722084 (htps:/
pubmed ncbiim nf. gov35722064)
Wadsworth HE, Dhima K, Womack KB, Hart J, Weiner MF,
Hynan LS, etal. (December 2018). "Validity of
Telencuropeycological Assesment One Pationts wth
Cognitive Disorders” (tips www. nebi.nim.rih.govipmefarticl
/PMC5BB7728). Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology. 33
(@: 1040-1045. doi:10.109S/arcin/acx40 (htips:lido.org/40.
{aay tarcinck aoa), PMC 6587729 (nipsihnanne
iinlm.nih.gov/pmearicies/PM(C6887729). PAID 29329363 (nt
tpsipubmed neb.nim.rin.govi29329363)
Val Danilov |, Medine D, Mihailova S (3 July 2025). "Natural
Neurostimulation for Chronie Pain Management: A Case

Series of 3 Patients with Dysmenorthea and Menstrual
Migraine (hitps:/idoi.org/10.21826%2F obm neurobiol.25032

5.

76.





78.



79.

20.





22.



83.

84,



8s.

26.





‘907/http://ceb.nim.nin. goviprojtiproooks. htm),
drchwve nim nin gov. Archived tram te orginal (ntplceb
nih. goviprojftiprbooks.htm) on 11 October 2014. Retrieved
Siapaaeieooes ne)

67. Madigan M, Martinko J, eds. (2006). Brock Biology of
‘Microorganisms (11th éd,). Prentice Hall. ISBN 978-0-13-
1443297,

68, Michael Servetus Research (hitp:/imichaelservetusresearch.c
‘om/ENGLISH/works.himi) Archived (https:/web.archive.orgiw
(eb/2012111322385 Littp: ww michaelservetusresearch.co
m/ENGLISH/works.himi) 13 November 2012 at the Wayback
Machine West wits graphical study on the Manlserpt of
aris by Servetus

68. Lynch CD, O'Sullivan VR, MeGillycuddy CT (December,

2006). "Pierre Fauchard: the father of modern dentistry (hit
psilidoi org/10.1038%62Fs)bdj, 4814350). British Dental
Journal. 203 (12): 773-781. doi:10.1038/s).bdj.48:14350 (http
‘sldoi.org/10.1038%2Fj.bdj.4814350). PMID 17183395 (http
‘sJipubmed.ncbi.nim.nih,gov/17183395).

70. Wiliams G (2010). Angel of Death. Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-230-27471.6.





PMID 38596573 (hitps://pubmed,ncbi.nlm.ni, govi3859657
2.

‘Aluvinare A (November 1993). "Rohal Kramaya Lovata
Dhayadha Kale Sri Lankikayo". Vidhusara Science Magazine:
5.

aL,

Rannan-Eliya RP, De Mel N (9 February 1997). "Resource
‘mobilization in Sri Lanka's health sector” (http:iimwwhsph ha
rvard.edufisgipublications/pdNo-42.PDF) (PDF). Harvai
‘School of Publ Health & Health Policy Programme, Institute
of Policy Studies. p. 19. Archived (hitps:/web.archive.o
frz0011026204e4ainp. lm hsph harvard edly peta
ttonsfpdNo-42 PDF) (POF) fom ine orignal on 29 Getober
2001. Retrieved 16 July 2008.

Grammaticos PC, Diamantis A (2008). "Useful known and,
unknown views of the father of modern medicine,
Hippocrates and his teacher Democritus”. Hellenic Journal of
Nuclear Medicine. 11 (1): 2-4. PMID 18932218 (hitps://pubm
ed.ncbi.nim.nih.gov/18392218)

‘44, The father of moder medicine: the first research of the
physical factor of tetanus (http://www. blackwellpublishing.co
/eccmid16/abstract.asp?id=50854) Archived (hitps:/iweb ar
chive.org/web/20111118132902/http:/www blackwellpublishi
'ng.com/eccmida/absiract.asp?id=50854) 18 November
2611 atthe Wayback Machine, European Society of Ciical
Microbiology and inechous Diseases

71. Cooper P (2004). "Medicinal properties of body parts" (htp
seb archive orglweb/20081203131508Intp in. pharm
om/Editora/20041216/chrstmas/p900bodyparts htm). The
Pharmaceutical Journal. 273 (7330; 900-000, Arctived om
the original (ttpswanw pharm com/edtonal2004121 christ
masip300bodyparis mi) on 3 December 2008,

72. van Der Heijden R, Jacobs DI, Snoeijr W, Hallard D,
VerpoorteR (March 2004). "The Catharanthus alkaloids:
pharmacognosy and biotechnology”. Current Medicinal
Chemistry. 11 (6): 607-628, dori0.2174/0929067043455846
(https:/idoi.org/10.2174%2F092986 7043455846).

Po 18022608 (his pubmed nc nin nih gov3503260
8).

73, Alanasov AG, Waltenberger 8, Pferschy-Wenzig EM, Linder
T, Wawrosch C, Unrin Petal. (December 2015). "Discovery
nd resupply of pharmacologcaly active plant-derived
natural products: A review” (https://www.ncbi.nim.nih.gov/pm
‘laricles/PMC4748402). Biotechnology Advances, 33 (8)
1582-1614, do:10.1016), biotechad2025,08,001 (htps/ido
iorg/40.1016552F) botechady,2015,08,001). PMC 4748402,
(htps:iwew.ncb.nim nih. govlpmelaniciesIPMC4746402)
PMID 26281720 (hips//pubmed.icbirim nih gov!2628172
0).

90). OBM Neurobiology. 09 (3): 1-11.
doi:10.21926/obm.neurobiol.2503290 (htips:/dol.org/10.2192
Sade nerebi SONS) moze
fal Danilov |, Medne D, Miailova S (January 2025).
"Modulating neuroplasticty with acoustic photonic intellectual
eurosimulalon (PIN) case suty or newodegeneraive
disorder" (hts Ndo.org/10.1016%24) brs 2024 12.1005).
Brain Stimulation. 18 (1): 561.
ddoi:10.1016);.brs.2024.12.1005 (https:/doi.org/10.1016%2F}
brs.2024.12.1008).

Minailova S, Medne D, Val Danilov | (January 2025).
"Acoustic photonic intellectual neurostimulation (APIN) in
Samenorftea managerant a ase say on a ado\ae yea management: a case study on an adolescent”
(itps:fidoi.org/10.101662F} brs.2024.12,860). Brain
‘Stimulation. ¥8 (1): 510. doi:10.1016/, brs.2024.12.860 (att
Sldoi.org/10,1016962F},brs.2024.12.860)

Medne D, Val Danilov |, Mihailova S (January 2025). "The
effect of acoustic and photonic intervention combined with
‘mental load on chronic headaches: a case study” (htips//dol,
‘org/10.1016%2F |, brs.2024.12,955). Brain Stimulation. 18 (1)

‘542-543. doi:10.1016)j,brs.2024.12.955 (https:/idoi.orgi10.10,
116%2F; brs. 2024.12.95)

Costantino A, Roncoroni L, Noviello D, Nandi N, Lombardo V,
Sericciolo A, etal. (13 April 2021). "Nutritional and
Gastroenterological Monitoring of Patients With Celiac
Disease During COVIO-19 Pandemic: The Emerging Role of
Telemedicine and Point-oF-Care Gluten Detection Tests” (hil

‘ilwww.2cbi.nim.nih.govipmclarticies/PMCB076748)
Frontiers in Nutition. 8 622514.

doi:10.3389/fnut.2021.622514 (hitpsidoi.org/10.3389%2Fin
U1 2081 629514) PMC 8076748 (tps vant nhgo
tdpmclaricles/PMC8076748), PMID 38928109 (hps!/pubm
ed.ncbi.nim.nih.gov/33928109)

E-health care information systems: an introduction for
students and professionals, John Wiley and Sons. 2005.

p. 219. ISBN 978-0-7879-6618-8.

Keaton L, Pierce LL, Steiner V, Lance K (October 2004). "An
E-rehabilitation Team Helps Caregivers Deal with Stroke" (htt
pulljahsp nova edu/articlesivol2numd/pierce-keaton.him)

‘The Internet Journal of Allied Health Sciences and Practice. 2
(4) liahsp.nova.edu. ISSN 1540-580X (hitps:l/search.worldea,
Lorglissn/1540-S80X). Retrieved 26 March 2011.



28.

29.

90.



on.



92.



Retrieved from “hpi wikipedia. orghwindex php?tile-Mediinedocid=1921427500"
